---
layout: post
title: "Implementing client-side git hooks in Python"
date: 2017-05-07
category: "Dev"
tags: [git, hooks]
comments: true
---
If you are unfamiliar with git hooks - please take the time to read this helpful [tutorial on git hooks](https://git-scm.com/docs/githooks) before continuing.

I have been using git hooks to validate code and commit messages before they make it into the repository.

## 1. Versioning the Git Hooks
By default, git hooks are stored in the `.git/hooks` directory of your repository. Anything inside this directory is not versioned so I needed to find a way to version the git hooks so other developers could use them when they pull from the repository.

To do this, I created a named `GitHooks` to store all of my git hooks. (Keep in mind this folder is outside of the `.git` folder so it can be versioned.) I then created symbolic links from the hooks in the `.git/hooks` folder to the hooks in the `GitHooks` folder. This way, when Git calls the hooks in the `.git/hooks` folder, it will actually be calling the hooks in the `GitHooks` folder.

This means that there is an extra step when setting up the git hooks. I created a `setup.py` script in my `GitHooks` directory for developers to run in order to activate the git hooks.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python
import os
import subprocess

git_hooks = ["applypatch-msg", "pre-applypatch", "pre-rebase", "commit-msg",
            "pre-commit", "prepare-commit-msg", "post-update", "pre-push", "update"]
versioned_hooks = [f for f in os.listdir(".") if f in git_hooks]

# make the versioned hooks executable and create symlinks to the hooks in the .git folder
os.chdir("../.git/hooks")
for hook in versioned_hooks:
    os.chmod("../../GitHooks/" + hook, os.stat("../../GitHooks/" + hook).st_mode | 0o111)
    subprocess.call("ln -s -f ../../GitHooks/{0} {0}".format(hook).split())

print("Successfully enabled the following git hooks: " + ", ".join(hooks_to_enable))
```

This is a helpful script but it would be nice if the developers didn't have to do this because it is a manual step that they could potentially forget.

Upon further research, I found a Git configuration variable named [core.hooksPath](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-config#git-config-corehooksPath) which was introduced in git version `2.9`. This variable represents the absolute or relative path to the hooks directory that git looks for. When I implemented my git hooks there were many people who weren't on this version of Git. However, it would be helpful for people who are on that version to set this configuration variable to like so...

```bash
git config core.hooksPath "./GitHooks"
```

This will cause git to look in the `GitHooks` directory for any repository and would make the `setup.py` script redundant.
